Mute.
Linda. Hello Sam. How are you?
Hello, Sam. Oh, there you are.
Yes. No, very nice to, to have you here, Linda.
Uh, it's wonderful to have you in front of the committee.
Um,
Good to be here. Thank
you for Thank you for having, can you see me?
Because I'm having No, can you?
No, we can't. So we'll just wait until we can get that,
um, video up.
Yeah. Is it, it's not something I'm doing wrong, is it?
I don't think so. Well, I dunno.
You have no idea.
It's all right. You might, oh yeah.
I'm gonna be promoted as a panelist.
Yeah, there you go. Excellent.
All right. We're in public session.
Oh, my videos are, hang on. What's going on here?
FaceTime says video off
and I don't know why FaceTime HD
camera start my video.
Oh, here we go. We're coming through.
We have you Welcome Linda.
Great to have you with the committee today.
We've got all of our members around the table.
Um, we have you for 10 minutes, so, uh,
you can use that time as you wish.
If you wanna speak to it the whole way through, you can, um,
assume people would like an opportunity to ask questions.
So, um,
I've got a bit speed. Yeah, thanks.
Great. All right. I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you, Linda. Awesome.
Well yeah, thanks for having me speak today.
Um, so my name's Dr. Linda Di.
I'm a GP and the founder of Meoc,
which is a private menopause clinic here in New Zealand.
Every day I hear from women navigating perimenopause,
menopause, and menopause.
Often after years of feeling unheard, dismissed
or told their symptoms were simply something
they had to get on with.
Menopause though is a huge
and inevitable phase that every woman will go through.
For some of those women, the symptoms can impact her job,
her marriage, her physical and mental health.
Yet menopause has long been under recognized
and poorly supported.
As you know, this hearing came about
because of the make menopause Matter
petition from Bro Smith.
There were three main requests in that petition,
and given that I'm a doctor, it probably makes sense for me
to focus on first request where she asked
for mandatory menopause training
for all GPS and medical students.
I agree that medical school curriculums
and the GP training program need
to have more menopause education embedded within them.
I didn't receive enough training about menopause at medical
school in the uk
nor when I completed GP training program
here in New Zealand.
But when it comes to our currently prescribing gps,
I'm not sure mandatory training is the way to go.
As someone who's worked in general practice myself,
I know the practical reality, our gps are already stretched
beyond capacity
and if we mandate additional training,
it's just gonna add further pressure to a system
that's already busting at the seams and struggling.
So what can we do instead? Well, I've got two suggestions.
The first involves taking a similar approach
to something we already do for another massive phase.
Many women go through pregnancy.
When I was a working gp, we were able
to present our newly pregnant ladies with a pregnancy pack,
like a goodie bag that contained quality information
and practical resources to help women understand how
to have a happy, healthy pregnancy.
And I think menopause deserves the same approach.
This menopause pack could contain clear information about
symptoms, treatment options, lifestyles, changes,
and pathways to further support
it would normalize the menopause experience, empower women
with the right knowledge and reduce the burden on GPS
to deliver all this information in a limited consultation.
The second way I think we could improve menopause care
for women in New Zealand is
to consider funding specialist menopause clinics.
This has already happened in the UK
and in certain parts of Australia too.
Funded access to specialist clinics would allow women
to get expert care without personal cost,
with no additional work placed onto general practice.
And without waiting several years for medical school,
GP training changes to filter
through into the current workforce.
So this combination of a national menopause information pack
and funded menopause clinics provides an approach
to support women now offering quality information at scale,
um, and specialist individual care when it's needed.
Um, so that's my spiel over, so I'm happy to take questions,
um, if anyone's got any.
Thank you. Uh, Linda, Jenny.
Oh, thank you very much. Uh, Linda, I really appreciate,
um, the time that you've spent today with us.
Um, I'm interested to know
what would be in the menopause pack.
Mm-hmm. Is this something you've already put
together or is this
No Recommendations on what should be in it?
Yeah, so if you, if you think about the bounty pack,
I think it's called the pregnancy pack,
which I think has sort of sponsorship by, you know,
bounty in companies.
But in the menopause pack we've gotta have
information about, you know, what the symptoms look like,
what are the different treatment options
that have evidence behind them.
And I don't just mean HRT,
but that would clearly have a big part in that.
'cause a lot of women don't understand HRT, A lot
of doctors don't understand HRT,
but also non-hormonal therapies
and psychological stuff, lifestyle stuff.
You could have some pelvic floor exercises in there.
You could have a big section on what your vagina's gonna do.
'cause women don't understand that side of things.
You could have samples of things in there.
I would love to give every woman over 40 a sample
of a vest in cream, which is vaginal estrogen.
I dunno if we could get that in the pack.
You know, there's, there's lots of avenues to explore.
You could have a, a thing about how to talk
to your husband about menopause.
Um, um, workplace support ideas.
You know, there is so much that could go into this pack
that women are desperate to know
and at the moment they're just getting bits
and pieces of information from different places
and this would standardize it.
And, and just a supplementary on that,
where would the packs be and how would women access
Those packs?
Well, if we, again, if we copy what we do
for pregnant women, it seems to be more in GP practices
that the packs were, were available, um, or in,
or the medical centers.
But for, you know, so, so that would be an obvious place
to sort of disseminate them.
And if it doesn't need to be a physical pack,
it could be an online thing, I suppose, you know, digital,
there could be a QR code on a poster, on a,
on a GPS notice board to say, you know, download your
perimenopause pack, your menopause pack.
So you know, all women are gonna get the same
quality information.
Um, and I suppose digital is a lot easier
'cause you can update it and add things and change things,
but it just makes sure women get all this info.
It's not some dodgy info
and they've got lots of time to troll through it.
It's not like they're just seeing a doctor for a,
a quick health checker point
where they blurt all this stuff out
and the doctor tells 'em a million things
and they go away and forget it all.
So, I don't know.
I, I just think it would be a nice good way
and quite a celebratory way.
Like we used to love giving women
to love giving women their little pregnancy plans, you know,
because you know they're gonna get all the information you
wish you had the time to tell them.
Thank you. Alright sir.
Thanks Dr. Dear.
Um, I'd like to explore your points about the, um,
menopause clinics
and, um, the need for, uh, specialist, um,
access to specialist menopause services.
Can you please explain, um,
how you mean the word specialist in that context?
Do you mean, um, uh, I'm aware
that GPS are specialists in, in New Zealand, uh,
would you consider a general practitioner a specialist?
If not, what is the type of training that takes you
to become a specialist and
of women going through the menopause?
How many of them would need specialist? Is it 2%, 10%, 30%?
How do you see that?
Well, this, this highlights another problem
that does need looking at
how do we train doctors in menopause here
beyond just the sort of basics.
And you're right, that's what's lacking.
So at the moment, menopause comes under the, the remit
of gynecology and endocrinology.
But the truth is, most gynecologists,
and I'm gonna get in trouble for saying this,
most gynecologists
and most endocrinologists are not very good at
menopause and hormone therapy.
And that is a fact. And there's been studies on
that globally to show that the training on menopause
and hormone therapy, even for these specialties
that are supposed to own menopause is not good.
Um, so it's still a varied sort of potluck.
If a woman pays to see a gynecologist
or an endocrinologist, she doesn't necessarily
get all the right up to date information.
There's some very good gynecologist and endocrinologist.
So they're the obvious specialists who are already classed
as specialists in menopause.
Although, as I say, it's very varied what that really means
in the GP land.
There's also no, no currently available course, you know,
in this country or in Australia.
I think University of Auckland are working on one.
I dunno how in depth it's gonna be at the moment.
What gps, most gps do is they join the Australasian
Menopause Society, go on the website.
But that in itself is a little bit misleading
because it doesn't mean they've done any training, reading,
gone to any lectures, gone to any conferences.
It's literally just a membership fee that they've paid.
What I did before I set my clinic up was did a exam
through the North American Menopause Society
who are now called the Menopause Society, which is an exam
that you have to recertify for every three years.
So that has some level of accreditation to it,
but you're right, it's a bit of a wild west, uh, in terms of
what do we call a specialist
and what do we not call a specialist?
So that would be, you know, that makes it more tricky,
I suppose, for you guys to decide, well,
which clinics are worth funding and which aren't.
'cause you don't wanna offer a service to women that claims
to be specialist when it's not.
So I, I understand that.
And then your second question was, oh God,
brain fogs made me forget it.
Uh, uh, let me just pick up on your point there
and I'll help you to the second question, the point
that you've made, you know,
and in terms of funding, most, uh,
mostly we would seek in New Zealand
to fund general practitioners
who are the main medical specialists
that the public have access to.
If what proportion of people would need, um,
more than what a general practitioner, um,
with an interest in menopause might be able to assist with.
Well, we are,
we are seeing 60 patients a week at my clinic, right?
So I, I started this clinic four and a bit years ago,
and it was just me on once a month on a Sunday.
And the demand skyrocketed, right?
So I think that speaks volumes to how
unhappy women are with the current service they're getting
and how they are voting with their feet
and their wallet to go and seek
and pay for consultations like ours.
To put percentages on it, I'm not sure.
But it is much higher than, than we assume
because most women are unhappy with the care they're getting
and that they're coming to clinics like mine.
And there's lots of other clinics like mine popping up,
which shows there is a need and a demand for this
because menopause is complicated.
There's very few women with a simple menopause experience.
There are some, but I'd say most women,
it's more complex than that.
And they need that more in depth.
Often it's about time, which is something GP don't have any
of, unfortunately.
But it is all about also about knowledge
and being, knowledge about hormone therapy particularly.
And it's also about empathy.
'cause there is some various attitudes out there towards
menopause, and some doctors genuinely don't think they
should be involved with it at all.
So there's all these, it's, it's complicated on both sides
for the woman and the doctor.
Uh, all right. Um, Linda, thank you very much
for being available today.
It, it was great to get you in front of the committee and,
and thanks for all the time.
Um, so members could ask questions.
Um, we, we, we'll go from there,
but yeah, just a big thank you on behalf of everyone.
No worries. Thanks guys. Bye. Bye.
Do the considerations on both of these. Sure.
Um, at the end of that, so we have a,
another hearing coming up now, um, 10 minutes
with Dr. Paul sing a briefing on young,
early onset dementia.
Welcome,
Welcome to the Health Committee.
Very good to have you in front of us today.
And we've received your, um,
your written submission as well.
So, um, look, we've got you here for 10 minutes.
If you want to give us time for
questions at the end, uh, you may. But, um,
I will hand that time over to you now.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, thank you Mr.
Chair and members of the committee for inviting me
to brief you on young onset.
And I also want to take the opportunity to thank you
and recognize all the work that you've actually done
and, um, putting that inquiry report together.
I know there's con considerable work,
but done by all of you, Kira.
My name is Dr. Paul Singh.
I'm a young onset dementia advocate.
I'm also the, um, carer for my wife Jackie, who lives
with young onset dementia.
And she, um, is now in care residential care.
Um, my purpose is to outline,
uh, what people with young onset dementia
and they far now are encountering
and what they actually face in day to day living.
And a system that's really, um,
about age care
and in particular, um, in the short briefing,
I can only cover a few short things,
a few parts of this.
So I want to bring your attention to my letter that I sent
to you originally, and that was for the, um,
about the actual report that you did do.
And it only had the barest mention
of any early onset cognitive neurocognitive, um,
conditions, and particularly young onset dementia,
which is my area of advocacy.
And the issue here that we do actually have is that
when we don't include young onset dementia,
it becomes invisible in the system
and it is invisible in the system.
And that means that we have to make allowances
and often we default to aged care settings.
So what we need is a recognition of that.
So young onset dementia, when it's not explicitly mentioned,
creates a few problems
'cause we're at a different life stage when we have young
onset dementia, and we need that age appropriate reaction
or policies in place for that.
So for example, people
with young onset dementia are under 65 years old when they
first experienced dementia.
And that means that they, um,
have employment and income matching that,
and they may have dependent children
and housing expenses to go with that as well,
and different physical economic and social needs as well.
So that is why, um,
when we default to age, sorry,
when we default to older age settings, um,
it can actually produce harm.
It's not a neutral effect.
And also downstream, it can actually increase costs both
for, um, people that are, are giving the support
and the services such as government
and also for the person with young onset dementia.
And they're far.
Now, if you only look at one thing I would ask
that you look at figure one of a briefing document,
it's on page two.
So what you'll see there is I'll put
through various stages from, we don't even know,
perhaps we have young onset dementia pre-diagnosis
to the actual diagnosis stage.
And I've in, in the actual oral briefing,
I'll combine the next stage from the weeks
after through to the first 12 months.
And then it steps through the stages as dementia progresses
to eventually end of life stage.
Towards the bottom of that figure,
you'll see the compounding effects.
I've used the, um, idea
of getting an early diagnosis.
If we don't get an early diagnosis, what will happen is that
we delay the diagnosis.
Dementia becomes more pro progressive.
It means that that has effect
and that compounds all the way through to, um,
the latest stages, increased costs, increased crisis,
more likely crisis, and also more likely carer burnout.
So if we can actually look at some of those things together,
that would be good.
So there's three things I think as a package,
a early starting package that we could actually do
as a country and as committee could recommend.
The first is timely diagnosis is a system
quality issue.
New Zealand research shows
that it takes 3.6 years on average
to diagnose young onset dementia from
first signs or symptoms of that dementia.
That's around two years longer than for older people
with dementia that is over 60 fives
or typically in the seventies and eighties.
What that means is that we've got
that flow on effect happening.
I think there are already some things we're working on
that I know the health, health community,
the medical community is actually working on.
They're updating the clinical pathways
for young onset dementia.
They have been for quite some time.
And really what we need to do though now,
currently at regional, each region has their own one.
We need a national clinical pathway.
Not only that, we also need GP education,
and that's really up to Health New Zealand.
So if we get those two things really going,
that actually moves the dial and it actually doesn't cost
or the expense isn't that high,
we often look at young onset dementia
and go, Ooh, that might be a bit hard to solve.
But I actually think that's one thing we could do.
The second is, um, in the first weeks
to 12 months after diagnosis,
we need a minimum national offer.
Now we all know that every region
and even district has different levels of capability,
but if we have that minimum offer, we can also,
um, at least have some minimum standards in place
that different regions of, um,
health New Zealand can actually work on.
And we also need social support.
So my idea is to have, um, a named navigator
assigned to that person, newly diagnosed
as they do at Dementia Canterbury and a few other places,
and they stay with them right through as much
as possible for that time.
It's really in the first weeks to 12 months
that it's quite intensive as the far now
and the person get used to this.
And we use that term dementia rehabilitation for that.
The third thing that I ask is
you've actually put in, uh, your report, um,
as example Rotary Care Village.
And that's actually a really good example, um,
for all people with dementia.
And in the same spirit I would like to recommend,
and I'm not sure if you have
or not, um, that you actually have a look at the Braintree,
um, facility in Christchurch
and, um, you actually see,
um, how that works.
So Braintree is a, is a hub, if you like,
that not only covers dementia and young onset dementia,
but it's co-located with a whole lot of NGA, so matter,
urine disease, multiple sclerosis, et cetera.
There's a cafe there, it's a completely
nonclinical type setting.
So these are three things I think you could
actually do as a committee.
Then you need two tests in place. One is the live reality.
If families are pushed into burnout and crisis
or end up in older age cities
because age appropriate sports aren't available,
the system is failing under 65-year-old needs.
So that's person centric, far centric.
The other is all about the system,
and that's accountability.
If agencies like Health New Zealand
and the Ministry of Health cannot jointly deliver
collectively report under 65 access
and supports, your onset dementia's gonna remain
invisible in the system.
So I'd like you to treat this briefing
as unfinished business as well.
I think, um, there's an opportunity, um,
that you could seek updates from Health New Zealand
and the Ministry of Health about the animal sick dementia.
But consi consider taking further evidence from
lived people with lived experience, people
with young onset dementia.
They're far now. The providers, people like Alzheimer's,
New Zealand and Dementia New Zealand,
young onset dementia are to royal trust and researchers
and our clinicians as well.
I think there is actually an opportunity for you.
I'll leave that up to the committee. Thank you.
So thank you. I'm happy to take the
Questions. Thank you.
Um, we we're over time.
Um, but look, I I think this is a really,
really good presentation.
Um, the in-person one was as good as what we received, um,
written via, um, you know, personal experience.
I, I have had local constituents coming in.
You may or may not be aware of that,
but I, I have, um, with this
and many others may have as well.
It's a, it's a genuine issue that we need to look at, uh,
as a country because there are some,
there are some gaps there, some major challenges for people
with young or early onset dementia.
Thank you for making the committee more aware of that.
We do appreciate your, your, your time
and um, your personal circumstances as well. Thank
Eric. Thanks for your presentation.
Very happy to,
if you want to contact me.
Thank you, Dr. Sam. Appreciate that offer. Thank
You.
Five two. Um, private please.
Of course.